I've got just about
enough fuel to get back, Pete!
Un-be-lievable, man!
You think we're the first
to see that, Nate!?
They're just not gonna believe this.
5-6 Henry to Shell Mera.
Flying in to Arajuno Station.
'Back within the hour.
Copy that 5-6 Henry.
Weather clear.
See you soon. Over.
God can do anything,
anything, anything...!
A what!?
A clearing, Jim...
it was amazing...
Tell'em, Pete!
Several large houses...
and about six smaller ones
all around it.
An Auca settlement--
the Indian tribe
we've been trying to find!
Where did you say it was?
By the banks
of the Curaray, Ed.
It's 15 minutes
by plane... 20 at most!
But that's just
right here!
I say we make
contact with them!
Wait guys...
the Auca's have killed anyone
that's ever been near them.
Remember the Oil
company people...
just, what...
a couple of years ago?
Four men surveying...
after weeks of being
in the same area...
Speared-- All of them!
I say go slow...
one step at a time.
I agree with Pete--
we make contact, but slowly.
I know the risk fellas'...
but man, the opportunity!
These people have never
ever had the gospel!
An unreached tribe!
I say...
"with God nothing
shall be impossible"
And I say we keep this
to ourselves.
We speak about it
and it's likely to get out of hand--
we may never have another
opportunity like this.
Hush-hush
Except our wives.
Other than that
not a word to anyone.
And if it be our loss...
may it be to God's glory.
And the Auca's salvation!
Iím in!
Operation Auca-- Yeah!
It's beautiful.
Quiet...
Peaceful...
lt always is up here.
lt was not always like this.
No.
There was a time when
we lived... in fear....
Fear?
Ah yes...
Fear of the foreigners,
fear of even of those
in our own tribe.
A time when we were killed
and when we also killed...
a time of darkness.
Before they came...
Jim?
Yes, Jim...
and Nate and Pete,
Ed and Roger...
The men God sent
to show us His ways.
God had put it in their
hearts to search for us.
Okay.
Face off, you guys.
Stay on your toes...
circle-circle.
Don't get too close
to the edge there!
Ha ha!
Outta shape, Elliot!
Arr...
Not a chance, McCully.
Yeah!
Good move! Alright!
Urh...
Hey guys!
Oooohhh!
So who's blue trunks?
Jim Elliot?
Huh!
Believe me, honey--
you're wasting your time!
Here we go!
Keep moving! Keep moving!
So, you won
the national public
speaking contest, huh?
You think you're just
the greatest stuff,
don't ya McCully?
You got a lotta talent huh?
Where'd you think you
got that from... hmm?
Iíll tell you where you got it!
Get off of'a me you...
God gave it to you McCully...
So what're you gonna do with it,
make money for yourself?
Huh?
You oughta be a missionary, Ed!
And Iím praying
God makes you one!
Okay, Jim...
you made your point!
Oooohhh--
grips' getting' better!
Ahh...
Oow!
That's gotta hurt!
So Jim doesn't date?
Single!
One-track, Jim?
One track mind!
For the mission field that is!
He'll be single forever!
(All - sigh)
Ugh...
Oow!
Think about
what I said though!
Maybe after law school!
You become a lawyer
and you'll be doing
what someone else can do...
but not many people
are answering God's call
to missions...
Think about it, Ed.
Umph!
Then onward from
the hills of light
our hearts with love aflame
Will vanquish all
the host of night
in Jesus' conquering name
What time is it?
Almost there...
Too bad Ed couldn't come
witnessing with us.
Man!
What happened?
Dead.
What!?
Dead! Dead!!
C'mon.
Swell! C'mon!
What's that noise?
Aaauuugghhh!!!
C'mon, C'mon!!
Step on the gas!
Step on the gas!!!
...Get out!
crash
Aaauuugghhh...
Wow!
You fellas' alright?
Yeah.
It's the second time...
What...?
First time I almost got killed
was on a hunting trip
when a bullet grazed my head.
God's got something
ready for me yet.
Dad's gonna kill me!
That's the car we were gonna
take for the mission trip
to Mexico next week.
Now how are we
gonna get there?
Mexico was a way for Jim
to work for God
outside of his country
for the first time
and well...
they found a way
to get there.
Thanks mister!
Noe!
Brilliant, Elliot!
Goodness,
he's picked up some
basic Spanish quickly...
How long has he been here?
Six weeks!
Hordes of determination.
'Tell you one thing...
What's that?
Jim Elliot's
a resolute young man.
That boy's going places.
India!?
You want to go
to India!?
Or South America.
Iím really
not sure!
After being here...
I...
Iím thinking that God
may want me to work there...
A Dr. Tidmarsh and I
have written each other.
He works with Indians
in Ecuador.
So... Iím praying!
Well, you'd make
a great teacher.
Folks could really
use you in the states!
Maybe...
but I just don't think it's
what God wants of me, Ron.
Folks in the US
have it all the time--
almost too much!
What Iíd really like to do
is work with people
that have never heard
the gospel.
I feel God is calling me...
To leave everything?
Home... country...
Once you go,
you may never come back.
Are you sure?
Sure?
Not yet...
But one thing,
I am sure of Ron,
is that he is no fool who
gives what he cannot keep
to gain what
he cannot lose.
He'll make the way clear
when the time comes.
Look at that Ron.
Here we are,
you and I,
just abounding in
God's goodness
and looking up at that
fantastic sight
and somewhere in
some part of the world
that same moon is
shining down on someone
who knows nothing
about Him...
Maybe someone that has never
even heard about God--
someone who doesn't
even imagine a god.
Wherever that person is,
that's where I want to go!
The poor thing is trembling!
I can't understand
a word she's saying!
Found her here
this morning, you say?
Si, Senor. An Auca.
Auca!?
That tribe is so savage,
they're feared by
all the others!
We've never been able to make
any sort of contact...
Of the friendly kind,
you mean...
she seems to have
run away..
Yes... well she's
terribly frightened
to whatever was
the cause, poor girl!
Dr. Tidmarsh will be
very interested.
And how is
the good doctor?
Oh, busy as usual.
They left for Shandia
this morning.
Which is where Iíd
better start heading!
Senor!
Very kind, Don Carlos!
My pleasure!
Senor...
Dr. Tidmarsh--
there has been
an accident!
Hmmmm!
A letter
from Dr. Tidmarsh.
My dear Jim,
I need to know if you
are seriously contemplating
coming to Ecuador.
As we recently suffered
a set-back.
Having boarded
a missionary plane
to return to our base,
it crashed not long after,
and my wife was injured.
We can no longer care
for the work we began.
And we need someone
to come and work among
the Quechuas
and reopen Shandia.
Ecuador!
Dear Dr. Tidmarsh...
I am on my way!
My dear Jim,
wonderful news!
I hope you and your friend,
Pete Flemming, like water!
You'll be at sea
about 20 days.
And I am sure
that upon arrival,
Quito will seem
another world to you.
Fresh plantains!
Good price!
Newspaper...
get your newspaper!
My name is Jim.
Now you'll have to learn
the basics of Spanish first,
about six months
of study,
which you'll do
in the Capitol.
Not here!
I need to go
to Central P.O.--
further ahead.
Alright sir!
You should have told me.
We're on our way.
And then you'll
be ready for...
Shandia!
lt will need rebuilding.
And I will not
stay there long.
You will need
to learn Quechua,
tend to basic needs,
clear land for an airstrip.
If Quito seems like
a different world,
Shandia will be
a different universe!
And be sure, Jim,
that as you are
obedient to God,
there will be tests.
Many tests.
Quickly! Run!
Saturday,
August 1 , 1 953--
They say it was
the worst rainy
season in 30 years.
For 36 hours
we dismantled the house
and moved barrels
of material non-stop.
Our language notes,
five buildings,
the kids playing field,
a hundred meters
of airstrip...
a year's work--
Gone!
I knew there would be tests
but hardly anything like this!
It's hard to understand
what God is doing...
Shandia is no more.
ln the name of the Father,
Son and Holy Spirit.
Thank you Lord!
A time of reaping!
Yes!
ln the last two weeks
they've just been
so open to the Word--
20 in Dos Rios, Pano the same--
and here in Shandia,
about a dozen more.
It's amazing what God's done
in one year, isn't it?
Like getting McCully
to the mission field!
Uh huh!
And one track Jim
getting married!
Miracle of miracles!
Pete-- honey!
And there's my miracle!
Coming, hon!
Not your usual church, eh?
But a live one!
Isn't that the truth, Ed.
Isn't that the truth.
Okay folks get ready!
Hon!
C'mon squeeze in a little...
Daddy!
Okay! C'mon! C'mon!
Pose and...
Smile!
So, Jim wasn't alone?
Oh no...
God called others
who were serving Him.
Jim prayed for help.
God sent it.
God had a plan.
Nothing here.
Hang on...
What!?
Hang on!
Aauuughhhh!!
What was that
all about!?
Over there...
I think... Yeah...
Look!
Where, where, where...?
Oh my goodness!!!
They're just not
gonna believe this!
Whoo!!!
I've got just about
enough fuel to get back, Pete!
It's Auca alright!
I don't know how we
never saw it before!
You know what?
This is what it's all about.
I feel as though this
is what God has been
leading me to
all these years.
I say we attempt
communications.
Sounds good... how?
Weekly flights.
With gifts--
we can drop them
in a basket,
just like we do
for other missionaries.
And some phrases.
ln Auca? How?
Daiyuma, the Auca girl
that escaped her tribe.
Never met her, but
have heard about her.
You guys go for the flights.
Iíll get some phrases,
so we can show them
that we're friendly.
See anything?
Not yet.
They're there...
just a matter of time.
Bito emite waa ponemo...
We are your friends.
Thank you, Daiyuma.
You've been very helpful.
You want to meet them?
We want to try, Daiyuma.
Do not trust them.
They will appear friendly...
and then...
Then!?
...they kill.
The men were patient
and persistent
at the same time.
They prayed...their wives prayed...
We... we were afraid--
and hid until one day...
Let me try calling again.
Praise God! There's one!
What are they doing?
They got it, Nate!
Ha! Ha!
We're getting a gift!
Ha! Ha! Ha!
Whohooo! Yes!
Praise God!
Time to plan the next step!
So we're in agreement--
Roger Youdarian joins the team.
We trust your judgment, Nate.
He's got experience--
he's a lot more jungle savvy
than the rest of us!
Okay, so January 3rd--
you fly us in one at a time
with the prefab tree house.
Ed, Roger and I stay,
and you and Pete fly back
to meet us in the morning
and out again in the evening.
And we use the radio
to stay in contact
with our families.
Hi, Daddy!
Speaking of which!!
Ha, ha! Woo!
Supper's ready guys!
Jim, Iím frightened!
Don't worry.
We're in God's hands.
What if--
Honey, all my life
I've tried to be obedient
to what God has
called me to do.
We can't stop now
just because there's a bit
of danger involved.
I know, but you won't
do anything silly, will you?
I promise.
Try it again, Pete!
Oh my...
Whooooaa...
slow down Jim!
Slow down.
Pete! Pete!
Roger! Ro-ger!
You?
Praise God! This is great!
Nate, you getting' this?
Nate!
Huh? What?!
Are you gettin' this?
Oh yeah... sure!
Thank You, Lord!
Thank You!
Ed! Hey Ed!
Huh?
Show'em the cockpit.
Okay-- Sure!
Hey, Pete!
What's up!?
Let's tell them about
the landing strip.
We can't keep using this one.
It's too sandy!
So plane lands...
swooooshhhhhh!
Ouch! Boom! Bang!
Hits the trees!
Nooooooo!
Trees out of the way!
Swooosh!
See? Good landing!
Way to go!
Ha, ha, ha!
ls he saying what
I think he's saying?
I think he is.
lt was a special day
for the missionaries--
a day they and their families
had been praying for.
Among them was joy...
but among our people... fear.
Our new friends
stayed till the evening
after a full
afternoon's visit.
Pete and I are back
in Arajuno for the night.
We're thrilled with such
an answer to prayer,
and trust God
for further visits
in the next few days.
God bless you there.
Over.
Well we're so relieved
to know that all went well
and that you're safe.
You are certainly
in our prayers
and we look forward
to more good news.
I love you honey!
Good night.
Two days and no movement!
If they don't come out
here in five minutes,
Iím heading out to their village!
Hold your horses, Jim!
Give'em time!
Wait a sec...
I see something!
Let's see what we have here...
Woohoo!!
Ha! Ha! Ha!
Get ready boys!
They're on their way!
Alright fellas'...
let's get a move on!
We got company!
Thank You, Lord!
Finally! Finally!
Looks like our neighbors
will be here
for the early
afternoon service!
Iíll get right back
in touch you with you at 4:30!
Over!
That's wonderful!
We'll be standing by.
ln the meantime,
you are all
in our prayers!
Over and out!
Can I say hi
to daddy?
Oh, sweetie!
He'll call back
at 4:30!
Hi, daddy!
Faith is the victory!
Oh glorious victory
that overcomes the world!
Whoahhh!
Hallelujah guys!
This is the day
we've been waitin' for!!
How many coming?
Seven-- maybe ten
at the most.
Sounds like a welcoming
committee to me.
I wonder if we'll go
to their village today?
Nate, your camera!
Got it right here!
Well... this is it!
Rog, what are you doing?
Taking notes, man--
this is historic!
What time is it?
Uh... 3:05!
They're here!
Welcome! Welcome!
And if it's our loss
may it be to God's glory!
AUUUGH!
Jim!
NO! NO!
Augggh!
And the Aucas salvation.
Stop! Stop!
AUUUGH!
We're friends! Stop!!
5-6 Henry!
Come in Shell Mera!
Come in Shell...
Aaauuuggghhh!
He is no fool who gives
what he cannot keep
to gain what
he cannot lose.
Shell Mera calling 5-6 Henry--
come in 5-6 Henry.
But why were they killed?
We were afraid...
we thought they had come
to trick us and kill us--
so we did what we had
grown accustomed to...
we ended their lives.
Later... years later...
we found out
they had weapons...
but they did not
fire on us...
they did not fire...
When Daiyuma later
returned to our tribe,
she told us more
about the men
and why they had come
to visit us.
We realized then,
that unlike others,
they had not harmed us
even when they had guns
and could have.
They were different
from the other foreigners.
We had watched them
from afar.
Later we understood
love and forgiveness--
for they gave their lives
willingly for us,
just as Jesus did
before them.
A few months later,
Jim Elliot's wife, Elisabeth,
and their daughter, Valerie,
and Nate Saint's sister, Rachel,
bravely came to our village.
They forgave us,
and through their forgiveness
we learned to forgive.
And through their love,
we learned to love.
Through their
courage and prayers...
we came to know God.
Five men died,
five women
and their families
forgave us.
Some of us--
including some of us
that had killed the men,
found God
and became Christians.
Because they were obedient
to the God they loved
and brought His light
to our people.
Elisabeth Elliot and her daughter
Valerie,
lived and worked among the Aucas
for two years
later to become a
well-known author, Marilou McCully
set up a home
for missionary children in Quito.
Olive Flemming returned to
the United States
and also wrote her
account of the story.
Barbara Youderian returnedto work
among the Jivaros,
where she and Roger had
previously labored.
Marj Saint took up a new missionary
post in Quito,
and Rachel Saint,
Nate's sister,
remained with the Auca'suntil her
death in 1 994.
No longer known as Aucas--
the Quechua word for "savage,"
the tribe is now known
by their real name--
the Waoranis.
Steve Saint, Nate's son,
continues work among the Waorani
to this day.